that has intelligence or understanding, right? What the intuition I'm wanting you to come to is
that computation doesn't have those phenomenal consciousness states. I actually, the argument,
again, interestingly, what a reviewer said this of one version, I think of the 2009 cognitive
computing paper, aren't you arguing too strongly? Doesn't this prove that nothing can have consciousness?
No, it doesn't. It just says that the operation of a digital computer, a finite state automata,
to pin it down more precisely, cannot give rise to conscious experience unless conscious
experience is in everything. That's all it says. Now, if you don't bite the bullet and say, well,
actually, I think I'm more than a finite state automaton. Thank you very much, Alex. There's
more to me. I'm an embodied entity. I don't just think in my brain, I think with my body
and my body in the world. And again, there's a beautiful result that came from a guy, and I'm
going to argue, this is a professor at Goldsmith's, and I'm going to take his work and extend it,
probably in ways that he would be uncomfortable. So this is my interpretation of work that's
published in a number of papers in Nature by Jules Davidoff on color perception by the Himba tribe
in his work in Africa. I'll describe this beautiful experiment, because I would argue
Jules is very cautious, academic, and he doesn't make wild proclamations that I'm
more comfortable looking at his work. But basically, Jules did this beautiful
experiment over a long period of time working with the Himba tribe in African color perception.
And when I first saw them, again, they blew my mind because they basically
appear to support the idea to me that language informs the not just the way that we package the
world, the way that we label it, that's kind of obvious, but the way that we see the world.
So how did Jules's work show this? Well, he took a series of color slides, like Munsell
colored slides, if you're familiar with these, well-precised blocks of color, and on one piece of
paper, for argument's sake, there were different shades of yellow, and on the one there, for
argument's sake, there were different shades of green, all equally different from one side of
the next with the same color difference, uniformly, so they went from a second dark green, if you
like, to a light green or whatever, the uniform color difference is one of the slides. And on
the sort of ochre yellowy one, if you showed that to Europeans, said which is the odd one out?
If you looked really carefully, not always, but often you'd say the one at the two o'clock
position. But it took you a lot of time, and you literally actually, in your mind's eye,
compare all the slides with each other, and if you were lucky, you said, yeah, it was that one,
but I've done this test and I mean, sometimes I don't even see it myself, it doesn't jump out,
it's not obvious, it doesn't pop out, and some of the times I make that decision
wrongly. Now, you show that to the Himba, and they sort of smile, go bang, it's the two o'clock one,
immediately, now we've called it places, it leaps out of them, and then we get the green ones. Now,
on the green ones, there's a blue style. So they show that to Europeans, what's the odd one out?
The blue one. Show that to the Himba, and the guy's got a stick, and he's rubbing his head,
and rubbing his imaginary beard, and I can't work it out. Now, when you look at that from a
Western linguistic perspective, how can the person not see the blue one is the odd one out? Well,
it turns transpired, the Himba got very restricted, or very limited colour vocabulary, compared to
Europeans, and no doubt if you took someone from the Himba and threw them into London after a period
of time, they would perceive the blue pop out, you meet just as quickly as we do. It's nothing to
do with the Himba's colour system, it's an effect brought on by language. But to me, what makes this
really powerful is that it's a pop-out effect, right? The Himba immediately get the one that's,
the colour boundary that's important to them pops out to them, because they've got a name for it,
and it's a, I can't remember what it was now, whatever name, it's an important thing, and it
pops out at them straight away. For us, the blue-green colour boundaries are important, and that pops
out to us straight away. And that, because it's a pop-out effect, that says that it's, to me, it's
actually, what it is like to see the slide, the Himba cannot possibly be seeing green and blue,
and the way that I am, otherwise the blue, presumably, would pop out of them, because they
must be seeing something bloody weird, but not, they aren't seeing those green and blue tiles
like I am, in their mind's eye, for want of a better word. And suddenly, when we look at these
sort of, oh, three yellow ones, they must be seeing that differently for me, because I can't
tell the odd one out with RB and quickly in the way that they can. Now, I think this gives us a
very strong evidence to me, or at least this is the way that I would like to use Jules's work,
and I must underscore that I don't think he would be comfortable with any of this, but this is the
way that I like to use it, to say that, you know, that the language is actually affecting how we see
the world. So when I say that our understanding of the world is not just, it's not just what's
going on in the brain, the brain is instrumental to how we see and perceive and interact with the
world, but it's not just that, it's our entire body, and also the body in the environment,
and also within a social network of language users. All these things come together to enable
us to form perceptions of what it's like to see, and what it's like to speak, to the idea that we
could just reduce this to mere neural fireings, or even worse, just some bloody manipulation of
symbols by a computer, it's just ludicrous as far as I'm concerned. I can see the logical
thought train here, so you're saying Jules said that language informs the way we see the world,
you know, one potential problem with that. That's my interpretation on his work. That's fine,
that's fine, but I suppose where I'm going with this is that it does, it's starting to get towards
this very kind of ultra relativist, constructivist view of the world, and I want to put an anchor
there. The reason why it's interesting is when you're talking about sensory states,
that it doesn't actually seem like such a bad thing, because everything you're saying there
completely makes sense. Of course, depending on where you are in the world, and your language,
and so on, you might have very, very different sensory states, and you might experience color
differently, but then there's like a topology, isn't there? So then you start getting into
understanding and semantics, and then you start getting into knowledge and truth,
and at some point, you know, people might start to disagree with you that we should have a kind
of ultra relativist view on what informs those things. So where do you draw the line there?
Right, well, one of the lovely things about being an academic is that you get to work with
some clever people. I'm not clever, but I've been blessed by working with a number of people who
bloody well are. And at the moment, I've got a postgraduate who's mind-boggling. I like to
say I supervise them the other way around. We're going for a discussion, and I come out feeling
I've had my mind blown away, and then he's sitting there looking quite chuffed with how
the whole discussion's gone. Now, his particular thesis has raised some really interesting questions,
and he runs with his very postmodern ideas in extremis. And on one particular
see-for-vision, I'm diabetic, and he was trying to make out, so he could give me this argument
where my diabetic is just an enactment of a certain practice, and I'd say,
that's nonsense. I'll die if I don't do this. How can you decide? The cell call thing,
the cell call conspiracy, if I reap off a tall building, I'm going to bloody well die. It's not
a social concert for this. But anyway, Paolo's work is very, very nuanced, and he does make
some radical claims. When you make radical claims, you've got to be very, very, very careful about
how you use the language. So I'm certainly not going to try and paraphrase his thesis in five
minutes on here, because it's an incredibly nuanced piece of work. But I just want to take one aspect
from it that I think is interesting, because I think it reflects on the world that we're living
in now, and gives us an insight, if it's possible, insight into how Trumpism and the echo chamber
culture has taken root. Because Paolo, and I'm not saying that you go along with this, I'm just
trying to report this as best I can from our discussions. Paolo thinks that we don't just have
epistemic perspectives on a universally shared world, where each of us ontologically can have our
own distinct ontologies. And why does that matter? Well, if it matters, says Paolo, if you start
looking at how this is reflected on Twitter, if you have a community of people, and one of my
other postcards, a guy called Christa Mayer, did a film called Right Between Your Ears, which I
can't recommend hardly enough, looking at an end of the world, documentary feature on the end of
the world cult, on an end of the world cult in America, and how these guys were saying then,
read in the Bible, the world's going to end on a certain day, and of course it didn't, and how
they then dealt with that, and then the leaders, that was going to end again in six months' time,
yet again it didn't. And Chris's film was just looking at how people can arrive at these surreal
beliefs, and I think there's something akin to that with the Q and On movement, and you had this
idea that, you know, so now Trump was going to lead, and the result was going to be overturned,
and then it wasn't, well, something else is going to happen. If you're not in that, how can people
have these bizarre ideas? Well, Paolo, if you get in the community of like-minded people, if we go
back to our basic philosophy and go back into a correspondence theory of truth, so much as a
coherence theory of truth, where a proposition is true because it coheres with the body of,
with the propositions that you take to be true, when you're interacting on a daily basis with
people in your Facebook bubble, who all share the same beliefs that us outside that bubble
look bloody bizarre, they're reinforcing this thing, so your view of the world, your ontological
view of the world becomes really real, you're drawn into this, and that's why people get so
aggressive about it, because it's not, as an academic might abstractly discuss the truth or
falsity of, I don't know, Newton's Law's emotion or something, this is what the world is, you're
questioning something fundamental about these people's experience of the world. We've kind of
covered a couple of big names tonight, we've had Turing come up and Sirle, the other big name that's
kind of been floating in the background is Girdle, in terms of like Girdle Asherbach, the
famous book on human creativity, and you kind of point to the Gordellian, we'll skip the other
guys, but like the Gordellian argument against the possibility of machine intelligence, just for
the guys out there that kind of want to get a bit of a grounding on why his name's been coming up so
much, can you kind of just give us a very brief primer on how Gordellian incomputability kind of
relates to the impossibility of machine intelligence, and how that kind of ties into the other arguments
we've been hearing tonight. Yeah, I think in the Archive paper, which you guys, I think,
hopefully signed posted at the beginning, Art of Intelligence is stupid, there's a, as best as I
can give it, a one paragraph summary in mathematical form of the Gordellian argument, and I don't think
it'd be helpful to go through that line by line now if your viewers are interested, I refer them
to the detail that's in that paper, but to just sort of talk at a slightly more abstract,
wider view, I think, you know, I'm sure Girdle and Turing were both the word of the implications
of their work on logic in Girdle's case and on computability in Turing's case.
And in fact, there are some people who think for Turing, and possibly for Girdle as well,
that some people have made the claim that this disconnect between Turing's avowedly
physicalist to desire to explain all of human mentality via a computer program, plus what
he'd learned professionally about the existence of non-computable numbers led to a big tension
in Turing's life. And there's a documentary that's looked at dangerous ideas, I think it was called,
that explored Girdle, Turing, and Kantor in that context, people who came up with ideas
in their own work that challenged intuitions they had about the world.
But coming off of Girdle, although I feel certain that Girdle and Turing are both in their mind
gone through the implications of their work, as far as I know, one of the first times where this
was actually cashed out in terms of an academic paper was by the Oxford philosopher John Lucas
in a series of exchanges with another philosopher called Paul Benekaraf in the 60s, where to cut
to the chase, I think that Lucas' argument is much more blunderbuss and less sophisticated than
Penrose's version of this. So I commend anyone interested to look at Chatters of the Mind rather
than go back to Lucas. But Lucas basically says, for any any consistent mathematical system, there
will be sentences in that system that we outside of it can see to be true, the Girdle sentence of
that system, but which we can prove can never be shown to be true by that system, unless the system
is inconsistent. And so that Lucas says, you give me any version of computation that you like,
I can, I as a human can step outside of that and see things about that computational system
that it provably cannot know for itself. And that's, I think, the first place where this
argument sort of took off. Penrose, his own take on this is a little bit more nuanced,
so you like to imagine looking at, in Chatters of the Mind, he looks at computations of one
parameter and looks at the question of whether that, he looks at the halting problem, in fact,
if you're familiar with that, on a function of one variable. And that can, you know,
is there a set of rules that will allow us to deter, to tell of any function of one parameter,
whether that function is computable or non computable. And he shows how that leads to a
contradiction. And if we follow the lines of the proof, we see that it comes to a point where we
see a particular statement on the operation of computation K, given K is input, we can see
something about that computation that it cannot possibly terminate, that cannot be shown to be
true following the rules of that system itself. And I think that's an interesting argument. And
as I said, it seems to me when I've read commentaries on Penrose, most people have criticised
his speculations on quantum physics, rather than what he has to say about Girdley and logic. And
in fact, Girdley and Penrose was famously invited to give the keynote at the centenary,
the Vienna conference, honouring Girdley for the centenary. So I think if there was some school
by error, because occasionally he goes, oh, Penrose is wrong. And I think that Penrose is not
stupid. And I think if there was a school by error in his work, I would like to think you've
probably found it by now. But I can recall, when I was at the University of Reading, having an
immensely long exchange with someone about Penrose, his ideas, I won't name them, but they were at
the University of Sussex. And after this has gone on for months and months and months, and I was
saying, look, look at this, look at this, look at this paper. And in the end, the guy turns back
to his advice too short to waste it reading what Penrose actually wrote. And I come across this so
often, people think they know what Penrose has said, or they think they know that Silverhead,
and they haven't bothered looking at the source material on either. And yeah, this is an issue
that comes up time and time again. And that was quite a shock to me, though, when this guy did
eventually concede that he hadn't actually read Penrose at that point in time. I hope he hasn't
actually hadn't. Fantastic. Well, Professor Bishop, it's been an absolute pleasure. Honestly,
thank you so much for joining us today. And I hope to get you back on the show soon.
Well, thank you. I really, I can't seem to be very rambly and unfocused description. I've
tried to think how you're going to get something interesting out of all this, but that's your
genius behind the editing machine, I feel. I hope it comes over okay.
No, honestly, it's absolutely fascinating. I think we don't really have much of an opportunity to
talk about philosophy of mind to talk about some of these deeper issues in AI. And I think this
is a really fascinating framework, actually, to think about some of the various different
focus point. I mean, you know, we had Pedro Domingo's on last week talking about that.
That was awesome. I really enjoyed that. I read the paper that you foregrounded and also watched
the little video that you did accompanying it. And yeah, I thought that was a really interesting,
deeply interesting paper. Effectively, you know, I'm making the case that any
gradient descent train neural networks doing nothing more than a look at interplay between
its training points effectively, which is a profound statement. And I need to let the
dust settle over that. But that was brilliant. It's nothing else. I mean, yeah, reading that was
a great thing for me to do with you guys. It's good for deflating some of the deep learning hype
to just to kind of like contextualize. But also with regards to the night, you've fleshed out
probably 10 people's reading lists or people's reading lists for the next sort of 10 years.
I wouldn't worry too much about rambling. All that means is that there's a lot of ground to cover
and not a lot of time to cover it in. This is the reason why I invited you on because a lot
of these things are very impenetrable. And when I read your paper, it's like a Google Maps kind of
point by point stepping stones list of all of the all of the important things that I need to know
in order to, you know, to get my head around this. And I think it's actually a really great
starting point for people that are interested in philosophy of mind and understanding and
consciousness and so on to read that paper that you wrote. If I read one book on modern cognitive
science, I'd say look at Evan Thompson's mind in life. Unfortunately, it's a bloody fat book,
